# Data-Wrangling: A Key Skill

## Overview

One of the key skills in any researcher's toolbox is the ability to work with data. When you run an experiment you get lots of data in various files. For instance, it is not uncommon for an experimental software to create a new file for every participant you run and for each participant's file to contain numerous columns and rows of data, only some of which are important. Being able to wrangle that data, manipulate it into different layouts, extract the parts you need, and summarise it, is one of the most important skills.

The next few chapters are aimed at refreshing and consolidating your skills in working with data. This chapter focuses on organizing data using the `tidyverse` package. Over the course of the activities, you will recap the main functions and how to use them, and we will use a number of real datasets to give you a wide range of exposure to what Psychology is about, and to reiterate that the same skills apply across different datasets. The skills don't change, just the data!


<div class='webex-solution'><button>A Note on Tidy Data</button>

<div class="info">
<p>In the style of programming we teach, the most efficient
format/layout of data is what is known as <code>Tidy Data</code>, and
any data in this format is easily processed through the
<code>tidyverse</code> package. You can read more about this type of
data layout in this paper:
<a href = "https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v059i10/v59i10.pdf" target = "_blank">Tidy
Data (Wickham, 2014)</a>. It is a surprisingly good read.</p>
<p>However, the data you work with will not always be formatted in the
most efficient way possible. If that happens then our first step is to
put it into <code>Tidy Data</code> format. There are two fundamental
principles defining <code>Tidy Data</code>:</p>
<ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
<li>Each variable must have its own column.</li>
<li>Each observation must have its own row.</li>
</ol>
<p><a href = "https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v059i10/v59i10.pdf" target = "_blank">Tidy
Data (Wickham, 2014)</a> adds the following principle:</p>
<ul>
<li>Each type of observation unit forms a table.</li>
</ul>
<p>And
<a href = "https://r4ds.had.co.nz/tidy-data.html" target = "_blank">Grolemund
and Wickham (2017)</a> restate this third principle as:</p>
<ul>
<li>Each value must have its own cell (i.e. no grouping two variables
together, e.g. time/date in one cell).</li>
</ul>
<p>Where a cell is where any specific row and column meet; a single data
point in a tibble is a cell for example. The
<a href = "https://r4ds.had.co.nz/tidy-data.html" target = "_blank">Grolemund
and Wickham (2017)</a> book is a very useful read and it is free, but
browsing the chapter on Tidy Data will help you visualise how you want
to arrange data. Try to keep the principles in mind whilst doing so.</p>
<p><br></p>
</div>

</div>


There are some questions to answer as you go along to help build your skills: use the example code as a guide and check your answer against the solutions at the end of the chapter. Finally, remember to be pro-active in your learning, work together as a community, and if you get stuck: google what you are trying to do, use the **<a href = "https://www.rstudio.com/resources/cheatsheets/" target = "_blank">cheatsheets</a>** or the **<a href = "https://psyteachr.github.io/" target = "_blank">Data Skills R Book</a>**. The key cheatsheet for this activity is the Data Transformation Cheatsheet with `dplyr`.

In this chapter you will recap on:

* Data-Wrangling with the Wickham Six one-table verbs
* Additional useful functions such as count, pivot_longer, and joins
* Piping and making efficient codes



<div class='webex-solution'><button>Portfolio Point - Getting Help</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Remember to open up your portfolio that you created in Chapter 1 so
you can add useful information to it as you work through the tasks. Also
summarising the information we give in this chapter, in your own words,
is a great way to learn! You don’t have to read all of these but they
might help from time to time to explain parts further.</p>
<p>For instance, do you remember how to get help on an R function in
RStudio? In your Console window, you can call the help function
(e.g. <code>?mutate</code>) to view the reference page for each
function. This example shows how to get help on the
<code>mutate()</code> function within <code>dplyr</code>, which we will
use in later labs.</p>
</div>

</div>

