## InClass Activity 3 (Additional)

One thing we looked at in the lecture and in the preclass activity were some rather "basic" ideas about probability using cards. Here is a couple of very quick questions using dice (or die if you prefer) to make sure you understand this. 

Have a go and see how you get on. If you don't get the right answers, be sure to post any questions on the available forums for discussions. Finally, don't forget to add any useful information to your Portfolio before you leave it too long and forget.

### Back to Basics

Show your answer either as a fraction (e.g. 1/52) or to 3 decimal places (e.g. 0.019).  

* What is the probability of rolling a 4 on a single roll of a six-sided dice? <input class='webex-solveme nospaces' size='10' data-answer='["1/6","0.167",".167"]'/>

* What is the probability of rolling a 4, 5 **or** 6 on a single roll? <input class='webex-solveme nospaces' size='10' data-answer='["3/6","1/2","0.5",".5"]'/>

* What is the probability of rolling a 4 **and then** a 6 straight after? <input class='webex-solveme nospaces' size='10' data-answer='["1/6*1/6","(1/6)*(1/6)","0.028",".028"]'/>


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Explain this - I dont get these answers</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Remember:</p>
<ul>
<li>Probability is the number of times or ways an event can occur divided by the total number of all possible outcomes.</li>
<li>When you have two separate events, the probability of them both happening is the joint probability which is calculated by mutliplying all the individual probabilities together.</li>
</ul>
<ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
<li><p>.167 as you have 1 outcome over 6 possibilities - <span class="math inline">\(\frac{1}{6}\)</span></p></li>
<li><p>.5 as you have 3 outcomes over 6 possibilities - <span class="math inline">\(\frac{3}{6}\)</span></p></li>
<li><p>.028 as you have 1 out of 6 on both occasions so the joint probability is used - <span class="math inline">\(\frac{1}{6} * \frac{1}{6}\)</span>. In this instance we do not have to worry about <strong>replacement</strong> as a dice always has 6 values. Unless of course you were to rub off a value after each roll of the dice but then that would be pretty unusual and you would go through dice pretty quickly, making them rather redundant little square cubes. Probably best we just assumed that didn't happen, we never talk about it again, and we assume replacement in this instance.</p></li>
</ol>
</div>

</div>

<br>
<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Job Done - Activity Complete!</span>

Well done on completing this activity! Once you have completed the main body inclass assignment on the Normal Distribution, you should be ready to complete the assignment for this lab. Good luck and remember to refer back to the codes and questions in this lab and the preclass if you get stuck!.
