# Permutation Tests - A Skill Set 

## Overview

To many, a lot of statistics must seem a bit like blind faith as it deals with estimating quantities, values and differences we haven't observed (or can't observe), e.g. the mean of a whole population. As such, we have to know if we can trust our statistical analyses and methods for making estimations and inferences because we rarely get a chance to compare the estimated values (e.g. from a sample) to the true values (e.g. from the population) to see if they match up. One way to test a procedure, and in turn learn about statistics, is through data simulation. In simulations, **we create** a population and then draw samples and run tests on the data, i.e. on this **known** population. By running lots of simulations we can test our procedures and make sure they are acting as we expect them to. This approach is known as a **Monte Carlo simulation**, named after the city famous for the many games of chance that are played there. 


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Portfolio Point - Monte Carlo or Bust</button>

<div class="info">
<p>You can go read up on the Monte Carlo approach if you like. It can, however, get quite indepth, as having a brief glance at the wikipedia entry on it highlights. The main thing to keep in mind is that the method involves creating a population and continually taking samples from that population in order to make an inference. This is what we will show you in this chapter. Data simulation and “creating” your own datasets, to see how tests work, is a great way to understand statistics.</p>
<p>Something else to keep in mind, when doing this chapter, is how easy it really is to find a significant result if even randomly created data can give a significant result. This may help dispell any notion that there is something inherently important about a significant result, in itself.</p>
</div>

</div>

<br>

In this chapter, you will perform your first hypothesis test using a procedure known as a **permutation test**. We will help you learn how to do this through building and running data simulation procedures. So overall the aims of this chapter are to:

1. Learn how to write code to simulate data
2. Learn about hypothesis testing for significant differences through a permutation test


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Portfolio Point - Simulating Data is not the same as Faking Data</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Now you may be thinking simulating data sounds very much like making fake data which you know is one of the Questionable Research Practices (QRP) that has lead to issues in the past. Let’s be clear, faking data for the purpose of finding an enviable result and publishing it (or even just telling people about it as though it is a real result) is very wrong. Never ever do this! It has unfortunately happened in the past and likely still happens. You can read more about the consequences and prevalences of faking data in <a href="https://www.cmu.edu/dietrich/sds/docs/loewenstein/MeasPrevalQuestTruthTelling.pdf" target = "_blank">John, Loewenstein &amp; Prelec (2012)</a> or in Chapter 5 of Chris Chambers’ excellent book, “The seven deadly sins of psychology: a manifesto for reforming the culture of scientific practice”, under the sin of Corruptability. There are three copies of this book in the University of Glasgow library (and Phil says you can borrow his if you promise to give it on to someone else after you have finished it!)</p>
<p>Simulating data however is not a QRP as the intent is to test your analytical methods and to test statistical theory. You simulate data to see how certain statistical tests wourk under different conditions (e.g. big or small difference between conditions). Alternatively, you simulate data to test your analysis code is working whilst you collect data - running an experiment takes time and so as you are gathering data, you can be using simulated data in the same shape as your eventual data to test your analysis code. Then when you have your actual data you just swap the simulated data for the real data. This is a great thing to do as it allows you to check ahead of evening running the experiment that your analysis will work and that you have not forgotten to collect some important piece of information - think of Registered Reports as discussed in <a href = "https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-016-0021" target = "_blank">Munafo et al., (2019)</a>. Lastly, maybe you want to simulate data to practice hand calculations to learn about tests. Even learning about a mean requires data so you can simulate data numerous times for yourself to practice hand calculating a mean.</p>
<p>As you can see there is a lot of important and useful reasons to learn about simulating data. And that it is very different from faking data. Simulating data is a very useful tool in a researcher’s toolbox. Faking data is very bad practice, often illegal, and you should never do it or feel pressured by anyone else to fake data. If you are ever in this situation please feel free to reach out to the authors of this book.</p>
</div>

</div>

<br>

In order to complete this chapter you will require the following skills, which we will teach you today:

  + Skill 1: Generating random numbers with `base::rnorm()` 
  + Skill 2: Permuting values with `base::sample()`  
  + Skill 3: Creating a "tibble" (a type of data table) using `tibble::tibble()`
  + Skill 4: Computing and extracting a difference in group means using `dplyr::pull()` and `purrr::pluck()`
  + Skill 5: Creating your own custom functions using `base::function()`
  + Skill 6: Repeating operations using `base::replicate()`
  

