



## The One-Sample t-test

The binomial test of the null hypothesis testing suggested that there was a significant difference in mean reaction times to valid trials on the modified Posner task between the participants in the pilot study and the participants in the original study by Woods et al. However, the binomial test did not use all the available information in the data because each participant was simply classified as being above or below the mean of the original paper, i.e. yes or no. Information about the **magnitude** of the discrepancy from the mean was discarded. This information is really interesting and important however and if we wanted to maintain that information then we would need to use a **One-sample $t$-test**.

In a One-sample $t$-test, you test the null hypothesis $H_0: \mu = \mu_0$ where: 

* $H_0$ is the symbol for the null hypothesis,
* $\mu$ (pronounced mu - like few with an m) is the unobserved population mean. It is the unobserved true mean of all possible participants. We don't know this value. Our best guess is the mean of the sample of 22 participants so we will use that mean here. As such will substitute this value into our formula, which we call $\bar{X}$ (pronounced X-bar), instead of $\mu$.
* and $\mu_0$ (mu-zero) is some other mean to compare against (which could be an alternative population or sample mean or a constant). For us this is the mean of the original paper which we observed to be 590 ms.  

And we will do this by calculating the test statistic $t$ which comes from the $t$-distribution - more on that distribution below and in the lectures. The formula to calculate the observed test statistic $t$ for the one-sample $t$-test is:

$$t = \frac{\mu - \mu_0}{s\ / \sqrt(n)}$$

* $s$ is the standard deviation of the sample collected, 
* and $n$ is the number of participants in the sample.

<br>

So, we are testing the null hypothesis that $H_0: \bar{X} =$ 590. As such the formula for our one-sample $t$-test becomes:

$$t = \frac{\bar{X} - \mu_0}{s\ / \sqrt(n)}$$

Now we just need to fill in the numbers.

### Task 4: Calculating the Mean and Standard Deviation {#Ch6PreClassQueT4}

* Calculate the mean and standard deviation of `valid_rt` for our 22  participants (i.e., for **all** participant data). 
* Store the mean in `ns_data_mean` and store the standard deviation in `ns_data_sd`. Make sure to store them both as single values!


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Helpful Hint</button>

<div class="info">
<p>In the below code, replace NULL with the code that would find the
mean, <code>m</code>, of <code>ns_data</code>.</p>
<p><code>ns_data_mean &lt;- summarise(NULL) %&gt;% pull(NULL)</code></p>
<p>Replace NULL with the code that would find the standard deviation,
<code>sd</code>, of <code>ns_data</code>.</p>
<p><code>ns_data_sd &lt;- summarise(NULL) %&gt;% pull(NULL)</code></p>
</div>

</div>


### Task 5: Calculating the Observed Test Statistic {#Ch6PreClassQueT5}

From Task 4, you found out that $\bar{X}$, the sample mean, was 625.464 ms, and $s$, the sample standard deviation, was 94.307 ms. Now, keeping in mind that $n$ is the number of observations/participants in the sample, and $\mu_0$ is the mean from Woods et al. (2009):

* Use the One-sample t-test formula above to compute your observed test statistic. Store the answer in `t_obs` .
* `t_obs <- (x - y)/(s/sqrt(n))`

<br>
<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>  

Answering this question will help you in this task as you'll also need these numbers to substitute into the formula:

* The mean from Woods et al. (2009) was <select class='webex-select'><option value='blank'></option><option value=''>595</option><option value='answer'>590</option><option value=''>580</option><option value=''>585</option></select>, and the number of participants in our sample is: (type in numbers) <input class='webex-solveme nospaces' size='3' data-answer='["22"]'/>.
* Remember the solutions at the end of the chapter if you are stuck. To check that you are correct without looking at the solutions though - the observed $t$-value in `t_obs`, to two decimal places, is <select class='webex-select'><option value='blank'></option><option value=''>1.66</option><option value='answer'>1.76</option><option value=''>1.86</option><option value=''>1.96</option></select>


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Helpful Hint</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Remember BODMAS and/or PEDMAS when given more than one operation to
calculate. (i.e. Brackets/Parenthesis, Orders/Exponents, Division,
Multiplication, Addition, Subtraction)</p>
<p><code>t_obs &lt;- (sample mean - woods mean) / (sample standard deviation / square root of n)</code></p>
</div>

</div>


### Task 6: Comparing the Observed Test Statistic to the t-distribution using **`pt()`** {#Ch6PreClassQueT6}

Now you need to compare `t_obs` to the t-distribution to determine how likely the observation (i.e. your test statistic) is under the null hypothesis of no difference. To do this you need to use the `pt()` function. 

* Use the `pt()` function to get the $p$-value for a <a class='glossary'>two-tailed<span class='def'></span></a> test with $\alpha$ level set to .05. The test has $n - 1$ degrees of freedom, where $n$ is the number of observations contributing to the sample mean $\bar{X}$. Store the $p$ value in the variable `pval`.  
* Do you reject the null?
* **Hint:** The `pt()` function works similar to `pbinom()` and `pnorm()`.
* **Hint:** Because we want the p-value for a **two-tailed** test, **multiply `pt()` by two**.


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Helpful Hint</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Remember to get help you can enter <code>?pt</code> in the
console.</p>
<p>The <code>pt()</code> function works similar to <code>pbinom()</code>
and <code>pnorm()</code>:</p>
<ul>
<li><code>pval &lt;- pt(test statistic, df, lower.tail = FALSE) * 2</code></li>
<li>Use the <strong>absolute value</strong> of the test statistic;
i.e. ignore minus signs.</li>
<li>Remember, <code>df</code> is equal to <code>n-1</code>.</li>
<li>Use <code>lower.tail = FALSE</code> because we are wanting to know
the probability of obtaining a value higher than the one we got.</li>
<li>Reject the null at the field standard of p &lt; .05</li>
</ul>
</div>

</div>

<br>

### Task 7: Comparing the Observed Test Statistic to the t-distribution using **`t.test()`** {#Ch6PreClassQueT7}

Now that you have done this by hand, try using the `t.test()` function to get the same result. Take a moment to read the documentation for this function by typing `?t.test` in the console window. No need to store the t-test output in a dataframe, but do check that the p-value matches the `pval` in Task 6.

* The structure of the `t.test()` function is `t.test(column_of_data, mu = mean_to_compare_against)`


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Helpful Hint</button>

<div class="info">
<p>The function requires a vector, not a table, as the first argument.
You can use the <code>pull()</code> function to pull out the
<code>valid_rt</code> column from the tibble <code>ns_data</code> with
<code>pull(ns_data, valid_rt)</code>.</p>
<p>You also need to include <code>mu</code> in the
<code>t.test()</code>, where <code>mu</code> is equal to the mean you
are comparing to.</p>
</div>

</div>


<br>
<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>  

To make sure you are understanding the output of the t-test, try to answer the following questions.

1. To three decimal places, type in the p-value for the t-test in Task 7 <input class='webex-solveme nospaces' size='6' data-answer='["0.092",".092"]'/>

2. As such this One-sample t-test is <select class='webex-select'><option value='blank'></option><option value=''>significant</option><option value='answer'>not significant</option></select>

3. The outcome of the binomial test and the one sample t-test produce <select class='webex-select'><option value='blank'></option><option value=''>the same</option><option value='answer'>a different</option></select> answer  

### Task 8: Drawing Conclusions about the new data {#Ch6PreClassQueT8}

Given these results, what do you conclude about how similar these 22 participants are to the original participants in <a href = "https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005796708002738" target = "_blank">Woods et al (2009)</a> and whether or not you have managed to recruit sleepers similar to that study? 

* Think about which test used more of the available information? 
* Also, how reliable is the finding if the two tests give different answers?

We have given some of our thoughts at the end of the chapter.
