## PreClass Activity 



We will now take each skill in turn. Be sure to try them all out. It looks a lot of reading but it is mainly just showing you the output of the functions so you can see you are using them correctly. The key thing is to try them yourselves and don't be scared to change things to see what might happen if you do it slightly differently. We will also ask a couple of questions along the way to make sure you are understanding the skills. 

The trick with this chapter is to be always thinking about the overarching aim of: 1) learning about simulating data, and 2) learning about hypothesis testing. This PreClass activity is setting up the skills to simulate data. We will get to the actual use of it in the InClass activity.

### Skill 1: Generating Random Numbers

The first step in any simulated dataset is getting some numbers. We can use the `base::rnorm()` function to generates values from the normal distribution which we saw in Chapter 4. It is related to the `dnorm()`, `pnorm()` and `qnorm()` functions we have already seen. Where as those functions ask questions of the normal distribution, the `rnorm()` generates values based on the distribution and takes the following arguments:

  * `n`: the number of observations to generate
  * `mean`: the mean of the distribution (default 0)
  * `sd` : the standard deviation of the distribution (default 1)

For example, to generate 10 or even 50 random numbers from a standard normal distribution (M = 0, SD = 1), you would use `rnorm(10, 0, 1)` or `rnorm(50, 0, 1)` respectively.  

* Type `rnorm(50, 0, 1)` into your console and see what happens. Use the below example for `rnorm(10, 0, 1)` to help you.  
* Try increasing `n` to 1000.  


```r
rnorm(10, 0, 1)
```

```
##  [1]  0.4718362 -1.2382692 -1.2042214 -0.2418053 -0.6838115  0.7842449
##  [7] -0.9419668  1.3458579  0.9236536  1.9262364
```
<br>
<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Question</span>  

* If you enter `rnorm(50, 0, 1)` again you will get different numbers. Why? <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["The numbers are random"]'> <option></option> <option>I have made a mistake</option> <option>The numbers are random</option> <option>R has made a mistake</option> <option>Phil has made a mistake</option></select>

So far so good. One thing worth pointing out is that the default arguments to `rnorm()` for mean and sd are `mean = 0` and `sd = 1`. What that means in practice is that you don't have to write `rnorm(10, 0, 1)` all the time if you just want to use those default mean and sd values. Instead you could just write `rnorm(10)` and it would work just as well giving you ten values from a normal distribution of mean = 0 and sd = 1. But let's say you want to change the mean or sd, then you would need to pass (and change) the `mean` and `sd` arguments to the function as shown below.  


```r
rnorm(n = 10, mean = 1, sd = .5)
```

* Try changing the mean and sd values a couple of times and see what happens. You get different numbers again that will be around the mean you set! Set a mean of 10, then a mean of 100, to test this.

Great. We can now generate numbers. But finally, for this Skill, say you wanted to create a vector with two sets of 50 random numbers from two separate samples: one set of 50 with a mean of 75 (sd = 1) and the other with a mean of 90 (sd = 1) - almost like creating two groups. In this case you would concatenate (i.e. link) numbers created from two separate `rnorm()` calls together into a single vector using the `c()` function from base R.  

For example,  you would use:


```r
random_numbers <- c(rnorm(50, 75),
                    rnorm(50, 90))
```

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>  

* In the above example code, what is the standard deviation of the two samples you have created? <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["1"]'> <option></option> <option>50</option> <option>75</option> <option>90</option> <option>1</option></select>


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Explain This - I don't get this answer!</button>

<div class="info">
<p>What is the <strong>default</strong> sd of the function?</p>
<p>Both populations would have an sd of 1, because that is the default. Remember if there is a default value to an argument then you don’t have to state it in the code.</p>
<p>Remember you can also easily change the sd value of each <code>rnorm()</code> by just adding sd = … to each function. They can have the same sd or different sds. Try it out!</p>
</div>

</div>
 
<br>
One useful thing though, as mistakes happen, it is always good to check that your new vector of numbers has the right number of data points in it - i.e. the total of the two samples; a sanity check if you will. The new vector `random_numbers` should have 100 elements. You could verify this using the `length()` function:


```r
length(random_numbers)
```
<br>
Which tells us that we have generated 100 numbers just as expected! Awesome. Check us out - already mastered generating random numbers! 

<span style="font-size: 18px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Skill 1 out of 6 Complete!</span>

### Skill 2: Permuting Values

Another skill that is useful to be able to do is to generate **permutations** of values. Say for example you have already the values collected, with certain numbers atttributed to group A and certain numbers attributed to group B. Permutating those values allows you to change who was in what group and allows you to ask if there was some important difference between the groups based on their original values.  


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Portfolio Point - What are Permutations?</button>

<div class="info">
<p>A <strong>permutation</strong> is just a different ordering of the same values. For example, the numbers 1, 2, 3 can be permuted into the following 6 sequences:</p>
<ul>
<li>1, 2, 3</li>
<li>1, 3, 2</li>
<li>2, 1, 3</li>
<li>2, 3, 1</li>
<li>3, 1, 2</li>
<li>3, 2, 1</li>
</ul>
<p>The more values you have, the more permutations of the order you have. The number of permutations can be calculated by, for example, <code>3 x 2 x 1 = 6</code>, where 3 is the number of values you have. Or through code: <code>factorial(3) = 6</code>. This assumes that each value is used once in the sequence and that each value never changes, i.e. 1234 cannot suddenly become 1235.</p>
</div>

</div>

<br>

We can create random permutations of a vector using the `sample()` function. Let's use one of R's built in vectors: `letters`. 

* Type `letters` into the console, as below, and press RETURN/ENTER. You will see it contains all the lowercase letters of the English alphabet. Now, I bet you are wondering what `LETTERS` does, right?


```r
letters
```

```
##  [1] "a" "b" "c" "d" "e" "f" "g" "h" "i" "j" "k" "l" "m" "n" "o" "p" "q" "r" "s"
## [20] "t" "u" "v" "w" "x" "y" "z"
```

We can use the `base::sample()` function with `letters` to put the letters into a random order:

* Run the below line. Run it again. And again. What do you notice? And why is our output different from yours? (The answer is below)


```r
sample(letters)
```

```
##  [1] "c" "u" "d" "f" "i" "e" "a" "w" "p" "x" "k" "t" "q" "h" "s" "y" "v" "z" "l"
## [20] "o" "j" "n" "r" "m" "g" "b"
```

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>  

* If `month.name` contains the names of the twelve months of the year, how many possible permutations are there of `sample(month.name)`? <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["479001600"]'> <option></option> <option>1</option> <option>12</option> <option>144</option> <option>479001600</option></select>


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Portfolio Point - Different samples with sample()</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Each time you run <code>sample(letters)</code> it will give you another random permutation of the sequence. That is what <code>sample()</code> does - creates a random permutation of the values you give it. Try repeating this command many times in the console. Because there are so many possible sequences, it is very unlikely that you will ever see the same sequence twice!</p>
<p>An interesting thing about <code>sample()</code> is that <code>sample(c(1,2,3,4))</code> is the same as <code>sample(4)</code>. And to recap, there would be 24 different permutations based on <code>factorial(4)</code>, meaning that each time you type <code>sample(4)</code> you are getting one of those 24 different orders. So what would factorial(12) be?</p>
<p>Top Tip: Remember that you can scroll up through your command history in the console using the up arrow on your keyboard; this way, you don’t ever have to retype a command you’ve already entered.</p>
</div>

</div>

<br>

And thinking about Skill 1 (generate) and Skill 2 (permute) we could always combine these steps with code such as:


```r
random_numbers <- c(rnorm(5, 75),rnorm(5, 90))
random_numbers_perm <- sample(random_numbers)
```

The first line of code creates the `random_numbers` - two sets of five.


```r
random_numbers
```

```
##  [1] 74.35868 74.17160 75.91439 76.84620 73.71939 89.19206 91.11152 89.41236
##  [9] 90.28996 90.47787
```

And the second line permutes those numbers into a different order


```r
random_numbers_perm
```

```
##  [1] 74.17160 91.11152 90.28996 89.41236 75.91439 89.19206 76.84620 73.71939
##  [9] 90.47787 74.35868
```

Brilliant! We can now permutate values as well as generate them. The importance of this in hypothesis testing will become clearer as the chapter goes on, but as a teaser, remember that probability is the likelihood of obtaining a specific value in consideration of all possible outcomes.

<span style="font-size: 18px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Skill 2 out of 6 Complete!</span>

### Skill 3: Creating Tibbles

Working with tables/tibbles is important because most of the data we want to analyze comes in a table, i.e. tabular form. There are different ways to get tabular data into R for analysis.  One common way is to load existing data in from a data file (for example, using `readr::read_csv()` which you have seen before).  But other times, you might want to just type in data directly.  You can do this using the `tibble::tibble()` function - you have seen this function a couple of times already in this book. 

Being able to create a tibble of data is a very useful skill when you will want to create some data on the fly just to try certain codes or functions. 

#### Entering Data into a Tibble

The `tibble()` function takes named arguments - this means that the name you give each argument within the tibble function, e.g. `Y = rnorm(10)` will be the name of the column that appears in the table, i.e. `Y`.  It's best to see how it works through an example.

The below command creates a new tibble with one column named `Y`, and the values in that column are the result of a call to `rnorm(10)`: 10 randomly sampled values from a standard normal distribution (mean = 0, sd = 1), as we learnt in Skill 1.


```r
tibble(Y = rnorm(10))
```

<div class="kable-table">

<table>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> Y </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 0.6275753 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -1.3282050 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 0.9986710 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -1.0552458 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 1.0973749 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 1.2884957 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -1.0587038 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 0.8326353 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -0.1169799 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 0.7732466 </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

If, however, we wanted to sample from two different populations for `Y`, we could combine two calls to `rnorm()` within the `c()` function. Again this was in Skill 1, here we are now just storing it in a tibble. See below:


```r
tibble(Y = c(rnorm(5, mean = -10), 
             rnorm(5, mean =  20)))
```

<div class="kable-table">

<table>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> Y </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -9.584343 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -11.526960 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -9.602943 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -9.259919 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -10.418807 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 20.532379 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 19.869586 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 19.902063 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 19.244200 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 20.431410 </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

Now we have sampled a total of 10 observations - the first 5 come from a group with a mean of -10, and the second 5 come from a group with a mean of 20. Try changing the values in the above example to get an idea of how this works. Maybe even add a third group!

Great. We have combined Skills 1 and 3 to create a tibble of data that we can start to work with. But, of course, it would be good to know which group/condition each data point refers to and so we should add some group names. We can do this using the `base::rep()` function.

#### Repeating Values to Save Typing

But before finalising our tibble, and adding in the groups, it will help to learn a little about `rep()`.  This function is most useful for automatically repeating conditions/values/data in order to save typing.  For instance, if we wanted 20 letter "A"s in a row, we would type:


```r
rep("A", times = 20)
```

```
##  [1] "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A" "A"
## [20] "A"
```

The first argument to `rep()` is the <a class='glossary' target='_blank' title='A type of data structure that is basically a list of things like T/F values, numbers, or strings.' href='https://psyteachr.github.io/glossary/v#vector'>vector</a> containing the information you want repeated, (i.e. the letter **A**), and the second argument, `times`, is the number of times to repeat it; in this case **20**.

If you wanted to add more information, e.g. if the first argument has more than one element, say groups **A** and **B**, it will repeat the entire vector that number of times; A B, A B, A B, ... .  Note that we enclose "A" and "B" in the `c()` function, and with quotes, so that it is seen as a single argument or list that we want repeating. The quotes around A and B (i.e. "A") are saying that these are <a class='glossary' target='_blank' title='A data type representing strings of text.' href='https://psyteachr.github.io/glossary/c#character'>character</a> data.


```r
rep(c("A", "B"), times = 20)
```

```
##  [1] "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A"
## [20] "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B" "A" "B"
## [39] "A" "B"
```

Ok that works if we want a series of A B A B etc. But sometimes we want a specific number of As followed by a specific number of Bs; A A A B B B - meaning something like everyone in Grp A and then everyone in Grp B. 

We can do this as well! If the `times` argument has the same number of elements as the vector given for the first argument, it will repeat each element of the first vector as many times as given by the corresponding element in the `times` vector. In other words, for example, `times = c(2, 4)` for vector `c("A", "B")` will give you 2 As followed by 4 Bs.


```r
rep(c("A", "B"), times = c(2, 4))
```

```
## [1] "A" "A" "B" "B" "B" "B"
```

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>

* The best way to learn about this function is to play around with it in the console and see what happens. Answering these questions will help. From the dropdown menus, the correct output of the following function would be:

1. `rep(c("A", "B", "C"), times = (2, 3, 1))`  - <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["A A B B B C"]'> <option></option> <option>A A A B B C</option> <option>A A B B B C</option> <option>A A B B C C</option> <option>A B C A B C</option></select>

2. `rep(1:5, times = 5:1)` - <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 4 5"]'> <option></option> <option>1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5</option> <option>5 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 2 2 1</option> <option>1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 4 5</option> <option>1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 5</option></select>  
 
#### Bringing it Together in a Tibble

Great. Let's get back to creating our tibble of data. Now we know `rep()`, we can complete our tibble of simulated data by combining what we've learned about generating random numbers (Skill 1) and repeating values (Skill 3). We want our table to look like this:

<div class="kable-table">

<table>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> group </th>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> Y </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -11.435732 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -9.123214 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -10.581591 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -9.892297 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -9.745320 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 19.710862 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 19.769016 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 20.727771 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 18.677838 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 21.008002 </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

You now know how to create this table. Have a look at the code below and make sure you understand it. We have one column called `group` where we create **A**s and **B**s through `rep()`, and one column called **Y**, our data, all in our `tibble()`:

* **Note:** We have not stated `times = ` in the below code but because of how the `rep()` function works it knows that the `c(5,5)` should be read as `times = c(5,5)`. This is not magic. Again it is about defaults and order or arguments. Just like you saw with `rnorm()` and not having to state mean and sd each time. 


```r
tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(5, 5)),
       Y = c(rnorm(5, mean = -10), rnorm(5, mean =  20)))
```

* Be sure to play around with the code chunk above to get used to it. 
    - Try adding a third group or even a third column? Perhaps you want to give every participant a random age with a mean of 18, and an sd of 1; or even a participant number.


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Helpful Hint</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Try <code>row_number()</code> to create participant numbers.</p>
</div>

</div>
 
<br>
Don't forget, if you wanted to store your tibble, you would just assign it to a name, such as `my_data`:

* **Note:** we are using the `row_number()` function to give everyone a unique ID.


```r
my_data <- tibble(ID = row_number(1:10), 
                    group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(5, 5)),
                    Y = c(rnorm(5, mean = -10), rnorm(5, mean =  20)),
                    Age = rnorm(10, 18, 1))
```

which would give a table looking like:

<table>
<caption>(\#tab:tibble3-new-1)Simulated data of two groups: Group A (M = -10, SD = 1) and Group B (M = 20, SD = 1). Each participant has been given a unique ID based on row number and a random age</caption>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:center;"> ID </th>
   <th style="text-align:center;"> group </th>
   <th style="text-align:center;"> Y </th>
   <th style="text-align:center;"> Age </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 1 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> -12.21979 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 17.33688 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 2 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> -10.88400 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 20.75731 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 3 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> -12.20528 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 18.35845 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 4 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> -10.77000 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 18.63691 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 5 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> -10.17820 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 17.87753 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 6 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 19.00950 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 16.78803 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 7 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 19.25667 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 18.44292 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 8 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 18.60762 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 17.86343 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 9 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 19.89482 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 18.59709 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 10 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 19.21873 </td>
   <td style="text-align:center;"> 17.44738 </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Fabulous! We are really starting to bring these skills together! 

<span style="font-size: 18px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Skill 3 out of 6 Complete!</span>

### Skill 4: Computing Differences in Group Means

OK so now that we have created some data we want to look at answering questions about that data. For example, the difference between two groups. Thinking back to Chapter 2, you have already learned how to calculate group means using `group_by()` and `summarise()`. For example, using code we have seen so far, you might want to calculate sample means for a randomly generated dataset like so:


```r
my_data <- tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(20, 20)),
                  Y = c(rnorm(20,  20, 5), rnorm(20, -20, 5)))

my_data_means <- my_data %>%
  group_by(group) %>%
  summarise(m = mean(Y))

my_data_means
```

<div class="kable-table">

<table>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> group </th>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> m </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> A </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 19.48526 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> B </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -21.69116 </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

However, you might want to take that a step further and calculate **the differences between means** rather than just the means. Say we want to subtract the mean of Group B (M = -21.7) from the mean of Group A (M = 19.5), to give us a single value, the difference: diff = 41.2. 

Using code to extract a single value and to runs calculations on single values is much more reproducible (and safer assuming your code is correct) than doing it by hand. There are a few ways to do this which we will look at.

**The `pull()` and `pluck()` method**

We can do this using the `dplyr::pull()` and `purrr::pluck()` functions.  

* `pull()` will extract a single column (e.g. `m`) from a tibble/dataframe (e.g. `my_data means`) and turn it into a <a class='glossary' target='_blank' title='A type of data structure that is basically a list of things like T/F values, numbers, or strings.' href='https://psyteachr.github.io/glossary/v#vector'>vector</a> (e.g. `vec`).  


```r
vec <- my_data_means %>%
  pull(m)

vec
```

```
## [1]  19.48526 -21.69116
```

We have now created `vec` which is a vector containing only the group means; the rest of the information in the table has been discarded. `vec` just contains our two means and we could calculate the mean difference as below, where `vec` is our vector of the two means and `[1]` and `[2]` refer to the two means:


```r
vec[1] - vec[2]
```

```
## [1] 41.17642
```

But `pluck()` can also do this and is more useful.

* `pluck()` allows you to pull out a single element (i.e. a value or values) from within a vector (e.g. `vec`).


```r
pluck(vec, 1) - pluck(vec, 2)
```

```
## [1] 41.17642
```

And we could run it a pipeline, as below, where we still `pull()` the means column, `m`, and then `pluck()` each value in turn and subtract them from each other.


```r
my_data_means %>% pull(m) %>% pluck(1) - 
  my_data_means %>% pull(m) %>% pluck(2)
```

```
## [1] 41.17642
```

**The `pivot_wider()`, `mutate()`, `pull()` approach**
 
An alternative way to extract the difference between means which may make more intuitive sense uses the functions `pivot_wider()`, `mutate()` and `pull()`.  From Chapter 2, you already know how to calculate a difference between values in the same row of a table using `dplyr::mutate()`, e.g. `mutate(new_column = column1 - column2)`.  So if you can get the observations in `my_data_means` into the same row, different columns, you could then use `mutate()` to calculate the difference.  

First you need to spread the data out. In Chapter 2 you learned the function `pivot_longer()` to bring columns together. Well the opposite of `pivot_longer()` is the `tidyr::pivot_wider()` function to split columns apart - as below.

* The `pivot_wider()` function (`?pivot_wider`) splits the data in column `m` by the information, i.e. labels, in column `group` and puts the data into separate columns.  
    * It is necessary to include `names_from = ...` and `values_from = ...` of the code won't work. 
    * `names_from` says which existing column to get the new columns names from.
    * `values_from` says which existing column to get the data from.


```r
my_data_means %>%
  pivot_wider(names_from = "group", values_from = "m")
```

<div class="kable-table">

<table>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> A </th>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> B </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 19.48526 </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -21.69116 </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

Now that we have spread the data, we could follow this up with a `mutate()` call to create a new column which is the difference between the means of A and B. This is shown here:
  

```r
my_data_means %>%
  pivot_wider(names_from = "group", 
              values_from = "m") %>%
  mutate(diff = A - B) 
```

<div class="kable-table">

<table>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> A </th>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> B </th>
   <th style="text-align:right;"> diff </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 19.48526 </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> -21.69116 </td>
   <td style="text-align:right;"> 41.17642 </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Question</span>  

* And just to check you follow the `mutate()` idea, what is the name of the column containing the differences between the means of A and B? <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["diff"]'> <option></option> <option>means</option> <option>group</option> <option>m</option> <option>diff</option></select>

Brilliant. Now we have the difference calculated, if you then wanted to just get the actual `diff` value and throw away everything else in the table, we would use `pull()` as follows:

* **Note:** This would be useful if a question asked for just a specific single value as opposed to the data or value in a tibble.


```r
my_data_means %>%
  pivot_wider(names_from = "group", 
              values_from = "m") %>%
  mutate(diff = A - B) %>%
  pull(diff)
```

```
## [1] 41.17642
```


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Portfolio Point - Reading pipes and verbalising tasks</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Keep in mind that a very useful technique for establishing what you want to do to a dataframe is to verbalise what you need, or to write it down in words, or to say it out loud. Take this last code chunk. What we wanted to do was to spread, using <code>pivot_wider()</code>, the data in <code>m</code> into the groups A and B. Then we wanted to <code>mutate()</code> a new column that is the difference, <code>diff</code>, of A minus B. And finally we wanted to <code>pull()</code> out the value in <code>diff</code>.</p>
<p>Often step 1 of writing code or understanding code is knowing what it is you want to do in the first place. After that, you just need the correct functions. Fortunately for us, <code>tidyverse</code> names its functions based on what they specifically do!</p>
</div>

</div>

<br>

Brilliant. Brilliant. Brilliant. You are really starting to learn about simulating data and using it to calculate differences. This is a lot of info and may take a couple of reads to understand but keep the main goal in mind - simulating data can help us learn about analysis and develop our understanding! 

<span style="font-size: 18px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Skill 4 out of 6 Complete!</span>

### Skill 5: Creating Your Own Functions

In Skills 1 to 4, we have looked at creating and sampling data, storing it in a tibble, and extracting information from that tibble. Now, say we wanted to do this over and over again. For instance, we might want to generate 100 random datasets just like the one in Skill 4. Why? Why would I ever want to do such a thing? Well, think about replication. Think about running hundreds of subjects. One dataset does not a research project make! 

Now it would be a pain to have to type out the `tibble()` function 100 times or even to copy and paste it 100 times if we wanted to replicate our simulated data. We'd likely make an error somewhere and it would be hard to read.  So, to help us, we can create a custom function that performs the action you want; in our case, creating a tibble of random data.  

Remember, a function is just a procedure that takes an input and gives you the same output each time - like a toaster! All the functions we have used so far have been created by others. Now we want to make our own function to create our own data. 

A function has the following format:


```r
name_of_function <- function(arg1, arg2, arg3) {
  ## body of function goes between these curly brackets; i.e. what the function does for you.
  ## Note that the last value calculated will be returned if you call the function.
}
```

Breaking down that code a bit:

* first you give your function a name (e.g. `name_of_function`) and 
* then define the names of the arguments it will take (`arg1`, `arg2`, ...) - an argument is the information that you feed into your function, e.g. data, mean, sd, etc.
* finally, you state the calculations or actions of the function in the body of the function (the portion that appears between the curly braces). 

Looking at some functions might help. One of the most basic possible functions is one that takes no arguments and just prints a message. Here is an example below. Copy it into a script or your console window and run it to create the function.


```r
hello <- function() {
  print("Hello World!")
}
```

So this function is called `hello`. After you have created the function (by running the above lines), the function itself can then be used (run) by typing `hello()` in your console. If you do that you will see it gives the output of `Hello World!` every single time you run it; it has no other actions or information. Test this in the console now by typing:


```r
hello()
```

```
## [1] "Hello World!"
```

Awesome right? Ok, so not very exciting.  Let's make it better by adding an argument, `name`, and have it say Hello `name`. Copy the below code into your script and run it to create the function.


```r
hello <- function(name = "World!") {
  paste("Hello", name)
}
```

This new function is again called `hello()` and replaces the one you previously created. This time however you are supplying a default argument, (i.e. `name = "World!"`). You have seen many default arguments before in other functions like the mean and sd in `rnorm()` in Skill 1.  The new function we have created still has the same default action as the previous function of putting "Hello" and "World!" together. So if you run it you get "Hello World!". Try it yourself!


```r
hello()
```

```
## [1] "Hello World!"
```

Howver, the difference this time is that because you have added an argument to the input, you can change the information you give the argument and therefore change the output of the function. More flexible. More exciting.

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>

Test your understanding by answering these questions:

* Typing `hello("Phil")` in the console with this new function will give: <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["Hello Phil"]'> <option></option> <option>Hello Heather</option> <option>Hello Phil</option> <option>Hello Carolina</option> <option>Hello Eugene</option></select>

* Typing the argument as `"is it me you are looking for"` will give: <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["Hello is it me you are looking for"]'> <option></option> <option>Hello is it me you are looking for</option> <option>I just called to say Hello</option> <option>You had me at Hello</option> <option>Hello seems to be the hardest word</option></select>

* What argument would you type to get "Hello Dolly!" as the output: "<select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["Dolly!"]'> <option></option> <option>Dolly</option> <option>Molly</option> <option>Holly</option> <option>Dolly!</option></select>"

Great. From this basic function you are beginning to understand how functions work in general. However, most of the time we want to create a function that computes a value or constructs a table.  For instance, let's create a function that returns randomly generated data from two samples, as we learned in the Skills 1-3. All we are doing is taking the tibble we created in Skill 4 and putting it in the body (between the curly brackets) of the function.


```r
gen_data <- function() {
  tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(20, 20)),
                  Y = c(rnorm(20,  20, 5), rnorm(20, -20, 5)))
}
```

This function is called `gen_data()` and when we run it we get a randomly generated table of two groups, each with 20 people, one with M = 20, SD = 5, the other with M = -20, sd = 5. Try running this `gen_data()` function in the console a few times; remember that as the data is random, the numbers will be different each time you run it. And just to reiterate, all we have done is take code from Skill 3 and put it into our function. Nothing more.  

But say we want to modify the function to allow us to get a table with smaller or larger numbers of observations per group.  We can add an argument `n` and modify the code as below Create this function and run it a couple of times through `gen_data()`. The way to think about this is that every place that `n` appears in the body of the function (between the curly brackets) it will have the value of whatever you gave it in the arguments, i.e. in this case, 20.


```r
gen_data <- function(n = 20) {
  tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(n, n)),
                  Y = c(rnorm(n,  20, 5), rnorm(n, -20, 5)))
}
```

Ok here are some questions to see how well you understand what this function does.

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>

* How many total participants would there be if you ran `gen_data(n = 2)`? <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["4"]'> <option></option> <option>2</option> <option>4</option> <option>20</option> <option>40</option></select>

* What would you type to get 100 participants per group? <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["gen_data(100)"]'> <option></option> <option>gen_data(50)</option> <option>gen_data(10)</option> <option>gen_dota(100)</option> <option>gen_data(100)</option></select>


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Explain This! - I don't get these answers.</button>

<div class="info">
<p>The value that you give the argument for the function replaces the <code>n</code> every time it appears in the function. So saying <code>gen_data(2)</code> really changes the <code>tibble()</code> line from <code>tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(n, n))</code> to <code>tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(2, 2))</code>. This creates two groups with 2 people in each group and therefor a total of 4 people.</p>
<p>If you wanted 100 participants per group then really you want the tibble line to say <code>tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(100, 100))</code>. As such you would be replacing the <code>n</code> with 100 and as such the function would be called as <code>gen_data(100)</code>.</p>
</div>

</div>

<br>

**Challenge Question:**

* Keeping in mind that functions can take numerous arguments, and that each group in your function have separate means, can you modify the function `gen_data` to allow the user to change the means for the two calls to `rnorm`? Have a try before revealing the solution below.


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Solution To Challenge Question</button>


```r
gen_data <- function(n = 20, m1 = 20, m2 = -20) {
  tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(n, n)),
                  Y = c(rnorm(n,  m1, 5), rnorm(n, m2, 5)))
}

# m1 is the mean of group A
# m2 is mean of group B

# The function would be called by: gen_data(20, 20, -20)
# Giving 20 participants in each group, 
# The first group having a mean of 20, 
# The second group having a mean of -20. 

# Likewise, a call of: gen_data(4, 10, 5)
# Would give two groups of 4, 
# The first having a mean of 10, 
# The second having a mean of 5.
```

</div>



<div class='webex-solution'><button>Portfolio Point - Two important facts about functions</button>

<div class="info">
<p>Here are two important things to understand about functions.</p>
<ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
<li><p><strong>Functions obey lexical scoping.</strong> What does this mean? It’s like what they say about Las Vegas: what happens in the function, stays in the function. Any variables created inside of a function will be discarded after the function executes and will not be accessible to the outside calling process. So if you have a line, say a variable <code>my_var &lt;- 17</code> inside of a function, and try to print <code>my_var</code> from outside of the function, you will get an error: <code>object 'my_var' not found</code>. Although the function can ‘read’ variables from the environment that are not passed to it through an argument, it cannot change them. So you can only write a function to return a value, not change a value.</p></li>
<li><p><strong>Functions return the last value that was computed.</strong> You can compute many things inside of a function but only the last thing that was computed will be returned as part of the calling process. If you want to return <code>my_var</code>, which you computed earlier but not as the final computation, you can do so explicitly using <code>return(my_var)</code> at the end of the function (before the second curly bracket).</p></li>
</ol>
</div>

</div>

<br>

You are doing an amazing job, but don't worry if you don't quite follow everything. It will take some practice. Just remember, we simulate data, and we create a function to make replicating it easier!

<span style="font-size: 18px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Skill 5 out of 6 Complete!</span>

### Skill 6: Replicating Operations

The last skill (we promise it is quick) you will need for the upcoming lab is knowing how to repeat a function/action (or expression) multiple times. You saw this in Chapter 4 so we will only briefly recap here. Here, we use the  base function `replicate()`.  For instance, say you wanted to calculate the mean from `rnorm(100)` ten times, you could write it like this:


```r
## bad way
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
rnorm(100) %>% mean()
```

But it's far easier and more readable to wrap the expression in the `replicate()` function where the first argument is the number of times you want to repeat the function/expression, and the second argument is the actual function/expression, i.e. `replicate(times, expression)`. Below, we replicate the mean of 100 randomly generated numbers from the normal distribution, and we do this 10 times:


```r
replicate(10, rnorm(100) %>% mean())
```

Also you'll probably want to store the results in a variable, for example, `ten_samples`:


```r
ten_samples <- replicate(10, rnorm(100) %>% mean())
ten_samples
```

```
##  [1]  0.120979389  0.083494606 -0.075267313  0.073840347  0.133399957
##  [6] -0.056600599 -0.015981205  0.003498656  0.063554283 -0.074233798
```

Each element (value) of the vector within `ten_samples` is the result of a single call to `rnorm(100) %>% mean()`.

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>  

* Assuming that your `hello()` function from Skill 5 still exists, and it takes the argument `name = Goodbye`, what would happen in the console if you wrote, `replicate(1000, hello("Goodbye"))`? <select class='webex-solveme' data-answer='["Hello Goodbye would appear a thousand times"]'> <option></option> <option>Hello World would appear a thousand times</option> <option>hello Goodbye would appear a thousand times</option> <option>Hello Goodbye would appear a thousand times</option></select>.

Try it and see if it works!


<div class='webex-solution'><button>Solution To Quickfire Question</button>


```r
# the function would be:
hello <- function(name = "World!"){
  paste("Hello", name)
}

# and would be called by:
replicate(1000, hello("Goodbye"))
```

</div>

<br>

Excellent. And to very quickly combine all these skills together, have a look at the below code and see if you follow it. We will be creating something like this in the InClass activity so spending a few minutes to think about this will really help you.


```r
gen_data <- function(n = 20, m1 = 20, m2 = -20) {
  tibble(group = rep(c("A", "B"), c(n, n)),
         Y = c(rnorm(n,  m1, 5), rnorm(n, m2, 5))) %>%
    group_by(group) %>%
    summarise(m = mean(Y)) %>%
    pivot_wider(names_from = "group",
                values_from = "m") %>%
    mutate(diff = A - B) %>%
    pull(diff)
}

replicate(10, gen_data())
```

```
##  [1] 37.81662 36.61922 41.26746 38.03652 39.95342 37.37615 38.55536 39.32070
##  [9] 39.69043 41.70738
```

Every of the 10 values in this output is the difference between between two simulated groups of 20 participants where Group A had a mean of 20, and Group B had a mean of -20. 

<span style="font-size: 18px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Skill 6 out of 6 Complete!</span>

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Job Done - Activity Complete!</span>

To recap, we have shown you the following six skills:

  * Skill 1: Generating random numbers with `base::rnorm()` 
  * Skill 2: Permuting values with `base::sample()`  
  * Skill 3: Creating a "tibble" (a type of data table) using `tibble::tibble()`
  * Skill 4: Computing and extracting a difference in group means using `dplyr::pull()` and `purrr::pluck()`
  * Skill 5: Creating your own custom functions using `base::function()`
  * Skill 6: Repeating operations using `base::replicate()`

You will need these skills in the InClass activity to help you perform a real **permutation test**. Through these skills and the permutation test you have learnyt about simulating data which in turn will help you learn about null hypothesis significance testing. 

If you have any questions please post them on the available forums for discussion or ask a member of staff. Finally, don't forget to add any useful information to your Portfolio before you leave it too long and forget. Great work today. That is all for now.
