## Practice Your Skills {#Ch9PracticeSkills}

The purpose of this exercise is to test your ability to run and interpret a correlation for yourself, as shown in this chapter, but at the same time get you to think about all the skills you learnt previously. Most of the hard work is in the data wrangling; running the actual analysis, much like with t-tests, is very straightforward. Remember to refer back to previous chapters when stuck.


In order to complete these tasks you will need to download the data .csv file and the .Rmd file, which you need to edit, titled `GUID_L2_Ch9_PracticeSkills.Rmd`. These can be downloaded within a zip file from the below link. [**Download the Exercises .zip file from here**](data/10-s02/GUID_L2_Ch9_PracticeSkills/L2_Ch9_PracticeSkills.zip).

Once downloaded and unzipped you should create a new folder that you will use as your working directory; put the data file and the .Rmd file in that folder and set your working directory to that folder through the drop-down menus at the top. The .Rmd file itself will currently knit as there are no errors in the code and this is a good test that you can perform from time to time to make sure that there are still no errors in your code. Obviously this doesn't mean that all your answers are correct; it just means that the code is error free.

As in the previous exercises there are a number of code chunks already set up. The code chunks will require entering a number or entering and adjusting code that you have practiced in the chapters. Follow the instructions on what to edit in each code chunk. This will often be entering code based on what we have covered up until this point.

**Background**
The backdrop for the exercise is the following study:

Dawtry, R. J., Sutton, R. M., & Sibley, C. G. (2015). *Why wealthier people think people are wealthier, and why it matters: From social sampling to attitudes to redistribution. Psychological Science, 26, 1389-1400.* <a href = "http://journals.sagepub.com/stoken/default+domain/RrNc7nRzBpvJaMH5UEte/full" target = "_blank">Available on through this link with your VPN switched on</a>

The abstract of Dawtry, Sutton and Sibley (2015) reads:

**The present studies provide evidence that social-sampling processes lead wealthier people to oppose redistribution policies. In samples of American Internet users, wealthier participants reported higher levels of wealth in their social circles (Studies 1a and 1b). This was associated, in turn, with estimates of higher mean wealth in the wider U.S. population, greater perceived fairness of the economic status quo, and opposition to redistribution policies. Furthermore, mods from a large-scale, nationally representative New Zealand survey revealed that low levels of neighborhood-level socioeconomic deprivation - an objective index of wealth within participants' social circles - mediated the relation between income and satisfaction with the economic status quo (Study 2). These findings held controlling for relevant variables, including political orientation and perceived self-interest. Social-structural inequalities appear to combine with social-sampling processes to shape the different political attitudes of wealthier and poorer people.**

And is summarised by the <a href="https://sites.trinity.edu/osl/data-sets-and-activities/correlation-activities" target = "_blank">Open Stats Lab</a> as

**In this research, Dawtry, Sutton, and Sibley (2015) wanted to examine why people differ in their assessments of the increasing wealth inequality within developed nations. Previous research reveals that most people desire a society in which the overall level of wealth is high and that wealth is spread somewhat equally across society. However, support for this approach to income distribution changes across the social strata. In particular, wealthy people tend to view society as already wealthy and thus are satisfied with the status quo, and less likely to support redistribution. In their paper Dawtry et al., (2015) sought to examine why this is the case. The authors propose that one reason wealthy people tend to view the current system is fair is because their social-circle is comprised of other wealthy people, which biases their perceptions of wealth, which leads them to overestimate the mean level of wealth across society.**

**To test this hypothesis, the authors conducted a study with 305 participants, recruited from an online participant pool. Participants reported their own annual household income, the income level of those within their own social circle, and the income for the entire population. Participants also rated their perception of the level of equality/inequality across their social circle and across society, their level of satisfaction with and perceived fairness of the current system (meausred using two scales), their attitudes toward redistribution of wealth (measured using a four-item scale), and their political preference.**

The Open Stats Lab has an activity for this paper already set up that you can work through later for your own skills development. Here we will use an amended version so pay close attention to the instructions in this assignement and do specifically as each task asks. Today we will be running a correlation between a measure of Fairness and Satisfaction versus a measure of Support for Redistribution.
