# Introduction to GLM: One-factor ANOVA

## Overview

A key way that we attempt to learn from data is to build a **statistical model** that captures relationships among variables. You are actually already familiar with this approach but it just hasn't been phrased as such - this is what t-test, correlations, etc, do. In this chapter we will formalise this approach and introduce you to the General Linear Model (GLM) which you will read about in the Miller and Haden (2013) textbook (Chapters 1-3) as part of the PreClass. 

The GLM is a very common model in statistics in Psychology and it encapsulates a range of common analytical techniques that you are already familiar with and will become even more familiar with throughout this book as we will spend some of the next few lessons looking at the GLM and reading about it. The GLM covers all the t-tests and correlations you have looked at, and the ANOVA and regression we are going to come on to. Basically, the General Linear Model (GLM) is the foundation of a lot of that statistical tests we use. Over the next few chapters, and building for future years of study, we will introduce the GLM here, through working with the model "by hand" on a simulated dataset, as this one of the best ways to learn about linear models.

You will also notice a slight change in the assignments for the next few chapters in that you are required to do a little more computation than before. Keep in mind though that all the skills you need will of course be shown to you first or you have already learnt them. The previous chapters have been aimed at developing your general practical data skills and now we want to develop your understanding of the analysis and data you are working with.

As such, the goals of this chapter are:

- to recap and practice entering data into a tibble (tidyverse data frame - as introduced Chapter 5);
- to learn how to estimate model parameters from a dataset;
- to learn how to derive/generate a **decomposition matrix** that expresses each observation/participant as a linear sum of model components and error.

These terms will become more familiar to you over the following chapters and from reading Miller and Haden, but remember to make notes for yourself to help your solidify your learnin and, as always, ask as many questions as you like!
