# Continuing the GLM: One-factor ANOVA

## Overview

In the previous chapter you learned how to decompose a dependent variable into components of the general linear model, expressing the values in terms of a decomposition matrix, before finishing up with calculating the sums of squares. In this chapter, we will take it a step further and look at running the ANOVA from those values. Through this we will start exploring the relationships between sums of squares (SS), mean squares (MS), degrees of freedom (df), and F-ratios.  In this chapter we will show you how you go from the decomposition matrix we created in the previous chapter to actually determining if there is a significant difference or not.  

In the last chapter we had you work through the calculations step-by-step "by hand" to gain a conceptual understanding, and we will continue that in the first half of the inclass activities. However, when you run an ANOVA, typically the software does all of these calculations for you. As such, in the second part of the activities, we'll show you how to run a one-factor ANOVA using the `aov_ez()` function in the **`afex`** add-on package. From there you will see how the output of this function maps onto the concepts you've been learning about. 

Some key terms from this chapter are:

* **Sums of Squares (SS)** - an estimate of the total spread of the data (variance) around a parameter (such as the mean). We saw these in Chapter 11
* **degrees of freedom (df)** - the number of observations that are free to vary to produce a known output. Again we have seen these before in all previous tests. The df impacts on the distribution that is used to compare against for probability
* **Mean Square (MS)** - an average estimate of the spread of the data (variance) calculated by $MS = \frac{SS}{df}$
* **F-ratio **- the test statistic of the ANOVA from the F-distribution. Calculated as $F = \frac{MS_{between}}{MS_{within}}$ or $F = \frac{MS_{A}}{MS_{err}}$.

Again, these terms will become more familiar as we work through this Chapter so don't worry if you don't understand them yet.  The main thing to understand is that we go from the indivual data to the decomposition matrix to the Sums of Squares to the Mean Squares to the F-ratio. But in summary this is what we are doing:

**ANOVA PATH:** $Data \to Decomp. Matrix \to SS \to MS \to F$

As such, the goals of this chapter are to:

* to demonstrate how Sums of Squares leads to an F-value, finishing off the decomposition matrix
* to determine the probability of a F-value for given degrees of freedom (df)
* to explore using the `aov_ez()` function and how the outcome compares to your decomposition matrix calculations.

**Note:** The **`afex`** package is already installed on the Boyd Orr machines and only needs read into the library in the normal fashion. Do not install it on the Boyd Orr Lab machines. If you are using your own laptop you will need to make sure you have installed the **`afex`** package.
